\subsection{Mohan Ganesalingam}


\begin{displayquote}

there is a considerable gap between what mathematicians claim is true and what
they believe, and this mismatch causes a number of serious linguistic problems

\end{displayquote}

Perhaps the most substantial analysis of the linguistic perspective on written
mathematics comes from Ganesalingam \cite{ganesalingam2013language}. Not only
does he pick up and reexamine much of Ranta's early work, but he develops a
whole theory for how to understand with the language mathematics from a formal
point of view, additionally working with many questions about the foundation of
mathematics. His model which is developed early in the treatise and is
referenced throughout uses Discourse Representation Theory
\cite{kamp2011discourse}, to capture anaphoric use of variables. While he is
interested in analyzing language, our goal is to translate, because the meaning
of an expression is contained in its set of formalizations, so our project should be
thought of as more of 
a way to implement the linguistic features of language rather than
Ganesalingam's work analyzing the infrastructure of natural language mathematics.

Gangesalingem draws insightful, nuanced conclusions from compelling examples. Nonetheless, this subject is somewhat restricted to a specific linguistic tradition and framing and modern, textual mathematics. Therefore, we hope to (i) contrast our GF implementation point of view and (ii) offer some perspectives on his work.

He remarks that mathematicians believe ``insufficiently precise" mathematical sentences are would be results from a failure to  into logic. This is much more true from the Agda developers perspective, than the mathematicians. It is likely there are many mathematicians who assume small mistakes may go by the reviewers unchecked, as are the reviewers. However, the Brunei number offers a counterexample even the computer scientist has to come to terms with - because it's based off pen and paper work which hasn't terminated in Agda \cite{brunerie2016homotopy}.  And while this one example which may see resolution, one may construct other which won't, and it is speculative to think what mathematics is formalizable.

Gangesalingem also articulates ``mathematics has a normative notion of what its
content should look like; there is no analogue in natural languages." While this
is certainly true in \emph{local} cases surrounding a given mathematical
community , there are also many disputes - the Brouwer school is one example,
but our prior discussion of visual proofs also offers another counterexample.
Additionally, the ``GF perspective" presented here is meant to disrupt the notion of normativity, by suggesting that concrete syntax can reflect deep differences in content beyond just its appearance. Escher's prints, alternatively uniquely mirror both mathematics and art - they are constructions using rules from formal systems, but are appreciated by a general audience.

He also discusses the important distinction between formal (which he focuses on) and informal modes in mathematics, with the informal representing the text which is a kind of commentary which is assumed to be inexpressible in logic. GF, fortunately can actually accommodate both if one considers only natural language translation in the informal case. This is interesting because one would need extend a ``formal grammar" with the general natural language content needed to include the informal.


He says symbols serve to ``abbreviate material", and ``occur inside textual
mathematics". While his discourse records can deal with symbols, in GF,
overloading of symbols can cause overgeneration. For example certain words like
"is" and "are" can easily be interpreted as equality, equivalence, or
isomorphism depending on the context.

One of Ganesalingam's original contributions, is the notion of adaptivity :
``Mathematical language expands as more mathematics is encountered". He
references someones various stages of coming to terms with concepts in
mathematics and their generalization in somebodies head. For instance, one can
define the concept of the $n$ squared as $n^2$ of two as "n*n", which are
definitionally equal in Agda if one is careful about how one defines addition,
multiplication, and exponentiation. Writing grammars, on has to cater the
language to the audience, for example, which details does one leave out when
generating natural language proofs?

Mathematical variables, it is also noticed, can be treated anaphorically. From
the PL persepctive they are just expressions. Creating a suitable translation
from textual math to formal languages accounting for anaphora with GF proves to
be exceedingly tricky, as can be seen in the HoTT grammar below.

\subsubsection{Pragmatics in mathematics}

Ganesalingam makes one observation which is particularly pertinent to our
analysis and understanding of mathematical language, which is that of pragmatics
content. The point warranted both a rebuttal \cite{RUFFINO2020114} and an
additional response by Ranta \cite{RANTA2020120}. Ganesalingam says
``mathematics does not exhibit any pragmatic phenomena: the meaning of a
mathematical sentence is merely its compositionally determined semantic content,
and nothing more. ". We explore these fascinating dialogues here, adjoining our
own take in the context of this project.

San Mauro et al. disagree with this conception, stating mathematicians may rely
``on rhetorical figures, and speak metaphorically or even ironically", and that
mathematicians may forego literal meaning if considered fruitful. The authors
then give two technical examples of pragmatic phenomena where pragmatics is
explicitly exhibited, but we elect to give our own example relevant for our position on
the matter.

We look ask what is the difference in meaning between lemma, proof, and
corollary. While there is a syntactic distinction between \term{Lemma} and
\term{Theorem} in Coq, Agda which resembles Haskell rather than a theorem prover
at a first glance, sees no distinction. The words carry semantic weight :
\emph{lemma} for concepts preceding theorems and \emph{corollaries} for concepts
applying theorems. The interpretation of the meaning when a lemma or corollary
is called a carry pragmatic content in that the author has to decide how to
judge the content by its importance, and relation of them to the \emph{theorems}
in some kind of natural ways. Inferring how to judge a keyword seems impossible
for a machine, especially since critical results are perhaps misnamed the Yoneda
Lemma is just one of many examples.

Ranta categorizes pragmatic phenomena in 5 ways : speech acts, context,
speaker's meaning, efficient communication, and the \emph{wastebasket}. He
asserts that the disagreement is really a matter of how coarsely pragmatics is
interpreted by the authors - Ganesalingam applies a very fine filter in his
study of mathematical language, whereas the coarser filter applied by San Mauro
et al. allows for many more pragmatics phenomena to be captured, and that the
``wastebasket" category is really the application of this filter. Ranta
shows that both Speech Acts and Context are pragmatic phenomena treated in
Ganesalingam's work and speaker's meaning and efficient communication are in covered by San Mauro et al., and that the authors disagreement arises less about the content itself and how it is analyzed, but rather whether the analysis should be classified as pragmatic or semantic.

Our Grammars give us tools to work with the speaker's meaning of a mathematical
utterance by a translation into syntactically complete Agda judgment (assuming
it type-checks). Dually, efficient communication is the goal of producing a
semantically adequate grammar. The task of creating a grammar which satisfies
both is obviously the most difficult task before future grammar writers. We
therefore hope that the modeling of natural language mathematics via the
grammars presented will give insights into how understanding of all five
pragmatic phenomena are necessary for good grammatical translations between CNLs
and formal languages. For the CNLs to really be ``natural", one must be able to
infer and incorporate the pragmatic phenomena discussed here, and indeed much
more.

Ganesalingam points out that ``a disparity between the way we think about
mathematical objects and the way they are formally defined causes our linguistic
theories to make incorrect predictions." This constraint on our theoretical
understanding of language, and the practical implications yield a bleak outlook.
Nevertheless, mathematical objects developing over time is natural, the more and
deeper we dig into the ground, the more we develop refinements of what kind of
tools we are using, develop better iterations of the same tools (or possibly
entirely new ones) as well as knowledge about the soil in which we are
digging.
