
\begin{displayquote}

there is a considerable gap between what mathematicians claim is true and what
they believe, and this mismatch causes a number of serious linguistic problems

\end{displayquote}

Perhaps the most comprehensive presentation of a linguistic perspective on written
mathematics comes from Ganesalingam \cite{ganesalingam2013language}. Not only
does he pick up and reexamine much of Ranta's early work, but he develops a
whole theory for how to understand with the language mathematics from a formal
point of view, additionally working with many questions about the foundation of
mathematics. His model which is developed early in the treatise and is
referenced throughout uses Discourse Representation Theory
\cite{kamp2011discourse}, to capture anaphoric use of variables. While he is
interested in analyzing language, our goal is to translate, because the meaning
of an expression is contained in its set of formalizations, so our project should be
thought of as more of 
a way to implement the linguistic features of mathematical language rather than
Ganesalingam's work analyzing the infrastructure of natural language mathematics.


---- Random philosophical ideas
grammars can describe music, 
should the ruler and compass be seen as a syntactic entity, (obviously we can
describe them as such via group theory, but in some sense the imagery came before)
how is using a ruler and compass using our linguistic capacities, vs just
drawing a circle (which seems like it would be lot more similar).  Like, at what
point does a drawing, or painting, become a mathematical construction. Or music,
where there's a syntax, clearly denoting set of instruments over { tempo, pitch,
  volume } but different pianists may have disctinct interpretaions, or jazz,
and where modern music departs from this 
Art ->
Primitive -> Real -> Primitive, think of calder, where they are trees, each
having a presumably equivalent (up to some degree of physical stability)
Primitive -> Real -> Primitive 

Syntax vs semantics, a new look
sheet music grammar -> 
meaning of a theorem is the well formed forumla which represents it - a
syntactic unit 
if ones goal is syntactic completeness, then the meaning of the theorem is the
syntacic thing or {= things} which express it.
sem. ad. the meaning of a theorem is some way of expressing it, such that it is
communicable  (think of the harry ball theorem). mathematicians are blending
both, mixing meaning between syn. comp. and sem. adequate (i.e. the syntax does
presumably represent these abstract entites, but only to a point)

ASTs -> Linearization : PMCFG
ASTs -> AST : any kind of computation using agda

one could write a grammar for fol, use GF as a parser, export to haskell, and
then run a theorem prover on it
ASTs -> Other data type

what is a mathematic construction : we don't say this set of bits is this
theorem, or this unique computation (different times different runs, noise in
compiler opitmizations) even though they are , or this other set of bits is this theorem, 
extensionally the same vs intensionally the same

when does the complexity of using PGF become more hard than 

or is it somewhere in between, 

or is the meaning something

We can assign syntactic to describe meaning, and the meaning of natural language
utterances, vs. mathematics, vs physics , vs music, vs art (shape grammars) , vs physics

we typically associate syntax with writing, especially in CS
concrete sytnax : how are the units represented 
abstract sytnax : what is the abstract structure associated to 
  for computers, this is trees. as well for linguistics
semantics : what does the syntax represent 

Architecture : 
syntax -> 
Syntax -> signals (of samples) or digitally produced & modified -> 
meaning 

Or the syntax of physics vs the physics itself
where ultimately the sentences are is to be co



mathematics isn't inherently formal, and that constructing a formal model of it
validates our intuitions, in the same way that constructing a building which
stands validates our intuition, or creating an experiment with physics validates
our model (in this case, equations describing laws) of the world

Our models can only get more specific, i.e. we can only measure things up to
some decimal of accuracy (whereby noise of instruments, etc interferes).
similarly, we can only approximate proofs, 


 geometry, owes its existence to the need which was felt of learning something about the relations of real things to one another.

 As far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality, they are not certain; and
 as far as they are certain, they do not refer to reality. Einstein geometry and experience

---- end Random philosophical ideas

"
meaningful statements in some underlying logic. If it was pointed out that
a particular sentence had no translation into such a logic, a mathematician
would genuinely feel that they had been insufficiently precise. (The actual
translation into logic is never performed, because it is exceptionally laborious;
"
Mathematics - Meaning -> FOL 
but a lot of mathematics hasn't been formalized, and the mathematics
historically was less concerned with logic in the modern sense, although it was
concerned with truth, and proof, quite early


- what about visual mathematics, one should be careful to accept that
mathematics is purely a linguistic phenomena, as was pointed out previously


"
mathematics has a normative notion of what its content should look like; there is no
analogue in natural languages.
"
discusses normativity - there is and there isn't - maybe a set of normative
notions is better, with varying degrees of overlap and differences. certain communities are very 

1.2.3 full adaptivity

pre-geometry, geometry intuition
euclidean geometry : points in space,  ruler and compass
algebraic geometry : polynomials describing curves
inductive types
formal mode and informal mode aren't precise, so we should be skeptical.  HoTT,
for example, takes HITs, an incredibly nuanced syntactic feature, and describes
spaces with them (in the same way euclidean geometry saw them as sets of points,
or line segments between 
is both, in some sense, because it gives a mechinism of describing spaces
directly. 
"
From a linguistic perspective, the formal mode is more novel and interesting
because it is restricted enough to describe completely, both in terms of syntax
and semantics. By contrast, the informal mode seems as hard to describe as
general natural language. We will therefore look only at mathematics in the
formal mode.
"


Section 2

He says symbols serve to ``abbreviate material", 
inside textual mathematics, and are of less concern 
concrete syntax, interact with other parts of our brain than. But this is indeed
true for hour we're studying GF.

but its also worth pondering
how the symbols are expressive. Would be interesting to study this because strings in Agda are in some ways easier
to read,
"
The primary function of symbolic mathematics is to 
that would be too cumbersome to state with text alone. Thus a sentence
"

"
Because symbolic material functions primarily in an abbreviative capacity,
symbolic mathematics tends to occur inside textual mathematics rather than
vice versa. Thus mathematical texts are largely composed out of textual
"

"
adaptivity
a phenomenon that is much more remarkable than the use of symbols. Math-
ematical language expands as more mathematics is encountered. The kind of
"

"
Thus definitions always contain enough information to fully specify the
semantics of the material being defined.
"
What about Thomas Hales proofs, are these only semantically valid when they have
been formalized?


"
As a result, textual mathematics predominantly
uses the third person singular and third person plural, to denote individual
"

"
verbs, typically to refer to the mutual intent of the author and reader.
Working mathematicians treat mathematical objects as if they were Pla-
tonic ideals, timeless objects existing independently of the physical world. The
"

"
The limited variation in person and tense means that inflectional morphol-
gy plays only a small part in mathematical language. The only morphological
"

"The syntax of textual mathematics also exhibits relatively limited variation."


this means that textual mathematics can be effectively captured by a context-
free grammar (in the sense of (Jurafsky and Martin, 2009, p. 387)).

In contrast to the morphology and syntax of textual mathematics, its
lexicon is remarkably varied. As we have noted above, the mechanism of

no tense or events
no intesnionality
no modality

"
usual. To a first approximation, mathematics does not exhibit any pragmatic
phenomena: the meaning of a mathematical sentence is merely its composition-
ally determined semantic content, and nothing more. In order to state this point
"


"
Due to the absence of pragmatic phenomena, phenomena which are some-
times analysed as semantic and sometimes analysed as pragmatic can be
treated as being purely semantic where they occur in mathematics, i.e. they
can be analysed in purely truth-conditional terms. This applies particularly
to presuppositions, which play an important role in mathematics. Because
"

"
Thus, in some intuitive sense, syntax is dependent on the types of expres-
sions in a way that does not occur in existing formal languages. As we will
show in §3.2 and Chapter 4, this notion of type is too semantic itself to be
formalised in syntactic terms. In other words, the type of an expression is too
closely related to what that expression refers to for purely syntactic notions
of type to be applicable.
"

"
most ambiguity in mathematics is not noticed by mathematicians, just as the extensive ambi-
guity in natural languages is “simply not noticed by the majority of language
"

"
in an extremely compact manner. In essence, they serve as a mathematical
alternative to anaphor. They cannot be eliminated precisely because anaphor
"

reanalysis

Chapter 7 pg 181

be equal as distinct. In both cases, a disparity between the way we think
about mathematical objects and the way they are formally defined causes
our linguistic theories to make incorrect predictions. In order to obtain the
correct predictions about language, we need to make sure that the formal
situation matches actual usage.

mal proofs are provided; and the cycle repeats. Thus informal mathematics
changes over the centuries. 187

% my idea
engineers are motivated by needs and desires (emirical, descriptive,
practial) , whereas mathematicians are much more idealistic in their pursuits,
almost comparable to a stances on religious scripture

mathematics developing over time is natural, the more and deeper we dig into the
ground, the more we develop refinements of what kind of tools we are using,
develop better iterations of the same tools (or possibly entirely new ones) as
well as knowledge about the ground in which we are digging (these are adjoining)

in some sense the library of babel problem, whereby we dont just discover
predefined ideas by randomly sampling bags of words, but we have to work with
hard labor, sweat, and tears, to imbue the sentences of mathematics with meaning
that makes them descriptive, that there is some kind of internal, but
distributed, mental process which is mirror whats on paper (and the 'reality' it
describes)

relate this to HoTT as a perfect 'case study' in the foundations of mathematics

