---- Random philosophical ideas
grammars can describe music, 
should the ruler and compass be seen as a syntactic entity, (obviously we can
describe them as such via group theory, but in some sense the imagery came before)
how is using a ruler and compass using our linguistic capacities, vs just
drawing a circle (which seems like it would be lot more similar).  Like, at what
point does a drawing, or painting, become a mathematical construction (this difference is a pragmatic, contextual  one). Or music,
where there's a syntax, clearly denoting set of instruments over { tempo, pitch,
  volume } but different pianists may have disctinct interpretaions, or jazz,
and where modern music departs from this 
Art ->
Primitive -> Real -> Primitive, think of calder, where they are trees, each
having a presumably equivalent (up to some degree of physical stability)
Primitive -> Real -> Primitive 

Syntax vs semantics, a new look
sheet music grammar -> 
meaning of a theorem is the well formed forumla which represents it - a
syntactic unit 
if ones goal is syntactic completeness, then the meaning of the theorem is the
syntacic thing or {= things} which express it.
sem. ad. the meaning of a theorem is some way of expressing it, such that it is
communicable  (think of the harry ball theorem). mathematicians are blending
both, mixing meaning between syn. comp. and sem. adequate (i.e. the syntax does
presumably represent these abstract entites, but only to a point)

ASTs -> Linearization : PMCFG
ASTs -> AST : any kind of computation using agda

one could write a grammar for fol, use GF as a parser, export to haskell, and
then run a theorem prover on it
ASTs -> Other data type

what is a mathematic construction : we don't say this set of bits is this
theorem, or this unique computation (different times different runs, noise in
compiler opitmizations) even though they are , or this other set of bits is this theorem, 
extensionally the same vs intensionally the same

when does the complexity of using PGF become more hard than 

or is it somewhere in between, 

or is the meaning something

We can assign syntactic to describe meaning, and the meaning of natural language
utterances, vs. mathematics, vs physics , vs music, vs art (shape grammars) , vs physics

we typically associate syntax with writing, especially in CS
concrete sytnax : how are the units represented 
abstract sytnax : what is the abstract structure associated to 
  for computers, this is trees. as well for linguistics
semantics : what does the syntax represent 

Architecture : 
syntax -> 
Syntax -> signals (of samples) or digitally produced & modified -> 
meaning 

Or the syntax of physics vs the physics itself
where ultimately the sentences are is to be co



mathematics isn't inherently formal, and that constructing a formal model of it
validates our intuitions, in the same way that constructing a building which
stands validates our intuition, or creating an experiment with physics validates
our model (in this case, equations describing laws) of the world

Our models can only get more specific, i.e. we can only measure things up to
some decimal of accuracy (whereby noise of instruments, etc interferes).
similarly, we can only approximate proofs, 


 geometry, owes its existence to the need which was felt of learning something about the relations of real things to one another.

 As far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality, they are not certain; and
 as far as they are certain, they do not refer to reality. Einstein geometry and experience




Question : are there mathematical theorems which reference previous theorems

Corollaries are really just propisitons of the form if A then B,
So 


it should be argued We have no pretense that

---- end Randomphilosophical ideas

